bpo-47097: Add documentation for TypeVarTuple (#32103)
python/cpython: Doc/library/typing.rst

    ``covariant=True`` or ``contravariant=True``.  See :pep:`484` for more
    details.  By default, type variables are invariant.

.. class:: TypeVarTuple

    :class:`Type variable <TypeVar>` tuple.

>     A vanilla type variable enables parameterization with a single type. A type

Reviewer: Currently you start by contrasting the new type with `TypeVar`, but we need a brief sentence saying what the type _is_, before we dive into what it's _not_.

```suggestion
    Type variable tuple. A specialised form of :class:`type variable <TypeVar>`  that enables *variadic generics*.

    A vanilla type variable enables parameterization with a single type. A type
```

Author: Done.

>     A vanilla type variable enables parameterization with a single type. A type

Reviewer: I don't like the word "vanilla" here right at the top, it feels a little too informal.

Reviewer 2: This is user documentation, not a formal reference. "Vanilla" is fine.

Reviewer: > This is user documentation, not a formal reference. "Vanilla" is fine.

I don't feel particularly strongly about it, it's just not the adjective I'd use here.

Author: Changed to 'normal'.

    variable tuple, in contrast, allows parameterization with an

>     *arbitrary* number of types by acting like an *arbitrary* number of type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *arbitrary* number of types by acting as an *arbitrary* number of type
```

Reviewer 2: FWIW, I don't feel strongly about either variant.

Author: Hmm, I think I still prefer "like" - I think we should be careful not to give readers the impression that it really _is_ a tuple of type variables, and I think "as" leans a bit more towards suggesting that.

Reviewer: Sure, makes sense!

    variables wrapped in a tuple. For example::

        Shape = TypeVarTuple('Shape')

        class Array(Generic[*Shape]): ...

        array_1d: Array[int] = Array()       # 1 type parameter: fine
        array_2d: Array[int, int] = Array()  # 2 type parameters: also fine

>         array_0d: Array[()] = Array()        # 0 type parameters: also fine

Reviewer: This feels very abstract to have as the first example. Could we have something that's a bit more obviously useful as Example 1?

I was going to suggest that maybe you could show how to rewrite the signature of `map()` or `zip()` using variadic generics (they're currently pretty hacky in typeshed!), but then I realised I wasn't actually sure how you'd do that ://

Author: So uhh I guess this is one of the tricky things here. The `Array` use-case was actually the specific use-case we were targeting with PEP 646 (while ensuring it was useful for other use-cases too, of course). I'm aware though that this is a relatively niche use-case, relative to the full target audience of Python.

In particular, as it stands currently, off the top of my head I can't think of any standard-library-ish examples that benefit from PEP 646. We _were_ going to add a mechanism to support `map()` and `zip()`, but we decided to omit those mechanisms until a future PEP, given that PEP 646 was already so complicated.

The options I can think of here are:
1. Leave it as it is and live with it being a bit abstract/not relevant to the full target audience.
2. Explicitly mention the context - e.g. ending the preceding paragraph with "For example, in the context of numerical computing, this enables typing of multidimensional arrays based on their shape".
3. Go with a blander example that at least doesn't run the risk of confusing non-numerical-computing readers. We could go for something as simple as `tuple[*Ts]`, just for the sake of illustrating the mechanics of how `TypeVarTuple` works (though that could be confusing because `tuple` is already kinda variadic in the first place). Otherwise, we could just do something like `class Spam(Generic[*Ts]): ...; Spam[int]; Spam[int, str]`.
4. Brainstorm for a while longer to see if we can come up with a class-like object other than `Array` that would benefit from being variadic.

For what it's worth, though, my hunch is that most of the major use cases of variadic generics are relatively niche in the first place. At least, that's my vague memory from when I tried to go through all the issues asking for variadic generics in Python last year, pointing them to the PEP 646 review so they could check whether it would work for their use-case.

Reviewer 3: An example that didn't involve a variadic class would be something like `remove_first_element(xs: tuple[T, *Ts]) -> tuple[*Ts]:`. Right now, the reader has to know about generic classes too, which is quite intimidating as an initial example.

Reviewer: I believe you can actually do a pretty decent job of stubbing `functools.partial` with PEP 646, which is pretty rad:

```python
from typing import Any, Callable, Concatenate, Generic, ParamSpec, TypeVar, TypeVarTuple, overload

_P1 = ParamSpec("_P1")
_P2 = ParamSpec("_P2")
_T = TypeVar("_T")
_R_co = TypeVar("_R_co", covariant=True)
_Ts = TypeVarTuple("_Ts")

class partial(Generic[_P1, _P2, _T, _R_co, *_Ts]):
    @overload
    def __new__(cls, __func: Callable[_P1, _R_co]) -> partial[_P1, _P1, Any, _R_co]: ...
    @overload
    def __new__(cls, __func: Callable[Concatenate[*_Ts, _P2], _R_co], *args: *_Ts) -> partial[Concatenate[*_Ts, _P2], _P2, Any, _R_co, *_Ts]: ...
    @overload
    def __new__(cls, __func: Callable[_P1, _R_co], *args: *_Ts, **kwargs: _T) -> partial[_P1, ..., _T, _R_co, *_Ts]: ...
    def __call__(self, *args: _P2.args, **kwargs: _P2.kwargs) -> _R_co: ...
    func: Callable[_P1, _R_co]
    args: tuple[*_Ts]
    keywords: dict[str, _T]
```

But that's almost certainly too complex for a docs example...

Reviewer: What about something like the use case discussed here -- decorators which only accept positional args? https://github.com/python/typing/issues/1000

Reviewer 3: A non-trivial example that cannot be typed correctly without `Ts`:

```
def call_soon(callback, *args):
     ...
    callback(*args)
```

```
def call_soon(callback: Callable[[*Ts], None], *args: *Ts) -> None:
    ...
```

Author: Hah, glad you two are more creative on this one than I am :)

I'd hesitate to use `call_soon` as the first example, because it also involves `*args: *Ts`. But I've swapped it in for the `*args: *Ts` example - it's much better than `args_to_tuple`.

Alex: good point re `partial`, but agreed that it's probably a bit too complex for these docs. But Pradeep, `remove_first_element` looks good. One downside is that it's a bit harder to emphasise the "This allow a generic object to take an arbitrary number of type parameters" side of it, as opposed to "A TypeVarTuple can be _bound_ to an arbitrary number of type arguments", which feels slightly different - but I think it's probably a reasonable tradeoff for the increased simplicity of this first example.

    Note the use of the unpacking operator ``*`` in ``Generic[*Shape]``.
    Conceptually, you can think of ``Shape`` as a tuple of type variables
    ``(T1, T2, ...)``. ``Generic[*Shape]`` would then become
    ``Generic[*(T1, T2, ...)]``. The ``*`` brings the type variables out of the
    tuple and into the square brackets directly.

    (In older versions of Python, where ``*`` was less flexible, you might see
    this written using :data:`Unpack <Unpack>` instead, as
    ``Unpack[Shape]``. This means the same thing as ``*Shape`` - ``Unpack`` and

>     ``*`` can be used interchangeably in the context of types.)

Reviewer: Not a fan of having a whole paragraph within parentheses. Do we even need to bring up `Unpack` here, or can we leave it to the section below that's dedicated to `Unpack`?

Reviewer 2: It was my idea and I still feel it's a good idea to at least bring up `Unpack` as that is likely what people reading these docs are going to write for a few releases at least.

(What's wrong with parentheses?)

Reviewer: Parentheses are great but should be used with caution (they disrupt the flow of the sentence a little). They can also come across as a little informal sometimes (it's almost like an aside to the reader).

But more specifically in this instance -- a whole paragraph in parentheses, to me, seems a bit odd for technical documentation. Parentheses should be used for inessential, skippable sections. But if this section is inessential, then it probably shouldn't be included in the docs at all -- and if it's essential, then it probably shouldn't be in parentheses!

Reviewer 2: Well, in a sense this section *is* skippable if you're only using Python 3.11. Removing the parentheses to me feels like it would emphasize Unpack too much. Using a markup like "Note" just draws *more* attention to it. And omitting the paragraph feels doing users a disservice, because for many this *will* come up.

Maybe we'll just have to agree to disagree on how (in)formal these docs are supposed to be.

Reviewer: I think my main issue is that this paragraph duplicates the section on `Unpack` lower down. I don't mind referencing `Unpack` and linking to the dedicated documentation on `Unpack`, but I think this (as a sentence tacked onto the previous paragraph, rather than as its own paragraph) would be sufficient:

```suggestion
    (Note that in older versions of Python, you might see this written using
    :data:`Unpack <Unpack>` instead, as  ``Unpack[Shape]``.)
```

Author: Mm, fair point about the duplication with Unpack. Have replaced this with your suggestion.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done.

    Type variable tuples must *always* be used in combination with the unpacking
    operator. This helps distinguish type variable types from normal type

>     variables::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Type variable tuples must *always* be unpacked. This helps distinguish type
    variable tuples from normal type variables::
```

Reviewer 2: +1 on this shortening.

Author: Nice. Done.

>         class Array(Generic[Shape]): ...  # Not valid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        class Array(Generic[Shape]): ...  # Not valid (should be `Generic[*Shape]`)
```

Author: Nice. Done.

    list of type arguments or type parameters::

        class Array(Generic[*Shape, *Shape]):  # Not valid
            pass

    Finally, an unpacked type variable tuple can be used as the type annotation
    of ``*args``::

        def args_to_tuple(*args: *Ts) -> tuple[*Ts]:
            return tuple(args)

    In contrast to non-unpacked annotations of ``*args`` - e.g. ``*args: int``,
    which would specify that *all* arguments are ``int`` - ``*args: *Ts``
    enables reference to the types of the *individual* arguments in ``*args``.
    In this case, it binds those types to ``Ts``.

    For more details on type variable tuples, see :pep:`646`.

    .. versionadded:: 3.11

.. data:: Unpack

    A typing operator that conceptually marks an object as having been
    unpacked. For example, using the unpack operator ``*`` on a
    :class:`type variable tuple <TypeVarTuple>` internally uses ``Unpack``
    to mark the type variable tuple as having been unpacked::

        Ts = TypeVarTuple('Ts')
        array: tuple[*Ts]
        # Effectively does:
        array: tuple[Unpack[Ts]]

    In fact, ``Unpack`` can be used interchangeably with ``*`` in the context

>     of types. You might see ``Unpack`` being used explicitly in older versions
>     of Python, where ``*`` couldn't be used in certain places.

Reviewer: It might be good to be a bit more explicit about the advantages of using `Unpack` on older versions of Python

```suggestion
    of types. You might see ``Unpack`` being used explicitly in older versions
    of Python, where ``*`` couldn't be used in certain places::
    
        from typing_extensions import TypeVarTuple, Unpack
        
        Ts = TypeVarTuple('Ts')
        array1: tuple[*Ts]  # Syntax error on Python <= 3.10!
        array2: tuple[Unpack[Ts]]  # Semantically equivalent, and backwards-compatible
```

Author: Good idea. Done.

    by wrapping the type variable tuple in ``tuple[]``::

        shape: Shape          # Not valid
        shape: tuple[Shape]   # Also not valid
        shape: tuple[*Shape]  # The correct way to do it

    Type variable tuples can be used in the same contexts as normal type
    variables. For example, in class definitions, arguments, and return types::

        class Array(Generic[*Shape]):
            def __getitem__(self, key: tuple[*Shape]) -> float: ...
            def __abs__(self) -> Array[*Shape]: ...
            def get_shape(self) -> tuple[*Shape]: ...

    Type variable tuples can be happily combined with normal type variables::

        DType = TypeVar('DType')

        class Array(Generic[DType, *Shape]):  # This is fine
            pass

        class Array2(Generic[*Shape, DType]):  # This would also be fine
            pass

        float_array_1d: Array[float, Height] = Array()     # Totally fine
        int_array_2d: Array[int, Height, Width] = Array()  # Yup, fine too

    However, note that at most one type variable tuple may appear in a single
    list of type arguments or type parameters::

        class Array(Generic[*Shape, *Shape]):  # Not valid

>             pass

Reviewer 3: I'd prefer to skip most of these technical details and point to the PEP.

Reviewer 2: (Disagree, see my other comment.)

    ``covariant=True`` or ``contravariant=True``.  See :pep:`484` for more
    details.  By default, type variables are invariant.

.. class:: TypeVarTuple

    Type variable tuple. A specialised form of :class:`Type variable <TypeVar>`
    that enables *variadic* generics.

    A normal type variable enables parameterization with a single type. A type
    variable tuple, in contrast, allows parameterization with an
    *arbitrary* number of types by acting like an *arbitrary* number of type
    variables wrapped in a tuple. For example::

        T = TypeVar('T')
        Ts = TypeVarTuple('Ts')

>         def remove_first_element(xs: tuple[T, *Ts]) -> tuple[*Ts]: ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        def remove_first_element(xs: tuple[T, *Ts]) -> tuple[*Ts]:
            return xs[1:]
```

        remove_first_element(xs=(1,))
        # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to ()

>         # Return type is tuple[()]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # Return value is (), which has type tuple[()]
```

>         remove_first_element(xs=(1, '2'))

Reviewer: I think it's more obvious that the second element is a completely different type if the character is not a digit:

```suggestion
        remove_first_element(xs=(1, 'spam'))
```

        # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to (str,)

>         # Return type is tuple[str]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # Return value is ('foo',), which has type tuple[str]
```

>         remove_first_element(xs=(1, '2', 3.0))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        remove_first_element(xs=(1, 'spam', 3.0))
```

        # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to (str, float)

>         # Return type is tuple[str, float]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # Return value is ('spam', 3.0), which has type tuple[str, float]
```

        ) -> None:
            ...
            callback(*args)

    In contrast to non-unpacked annotations of ``*args`` - e.g. ``*args: int``,
    which would specify that *all* arguments are ``int`` - ``*args: *Ts``
    enables reference to the types of the *individual* arguments in ``*args``.
    Here, this allows us to ensure the types of the ``*args`` passed
    to ``call_soon`` match the types of the (positional) arguments of
    ``callback``.

    For more details on type variable tuples, see :pep:`646`.

    .. versionadded:: 3.11

.. data:: Unpack

    A typing operator that conceptually marks an object as having been
    unpacked. For example, using the unpack operator ``*`` on a
    :class:`type variable tuple <TypeVarTuple>` internally uses ``Unpack``
    to mark the type variable tuple as having been unpacked::

        Ts = TypeVarTuple('Ts')
        tup: tuple[*Ts]
        # Effectively does:
        tup: tuple[Unpack[Ts]]

    In fact, ``Unpack`` can be used interchangeably with ``*`` in the context
    of types. You might see ``Unpack`` being used explicitly in older versions
    of Python, where ``*`` couldn't be used in certain places::

>         from typing_extensions import TypeVarTuple, Unpack

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        from typing import TypeVarTuple, Unpack
```

Reviewer: Oh I actually think this is better as it is, since it's an example pointing out how `Unpack` is useful in code that wants to be backwards-compatible with Python <3.11.

Maybe we should be clearer about why we're importing from `typing_extensions` rather than `typing`, though.

Reviewer 4: 🤦 oh right. Thanks for pointing that out. And yeah not everyone knows what `typing_extensions` is (I didn't before I took over typing).

Reviewer: Maybe this?

```suggestion
        # we want to be compatible with earlier versions of Python in this module,
        # so import TypeVarTuple from the `typing_extensions` backports package
        # instead of importing it from `typing`
        from typing_extensions import TypeVarTuple, Unpack
```

Author: Mm, good point. Have committed a slightly more concise version of your suggestion, Alex.

    ``covariant=True`` or ``contravariant=True``.  See :pep:`484` for more
    details.  By default, type variables are invariant.

.. class:: TypeVarTuple

    Type variable tuple. A specialised form of :class:`Type variable <TypeVar>`
    that enables *variadic* generics.

    A normal type variable enables parameterization with a single type. A type
    variable tuple, in contrast, allows parameterization with an
    *arbitrary* number of types by acting like an *arbitrary* number of type
    variables wrapped in a tuple. For example::

        T = TypeVar('T')
        Ts = TypeVarTuple('Ts')

        def remove_first_element(xs: tuple[T, *Ts]) -> tuple[*Ts]:
            return xs[1:]

>         remove_first_element(xs=(1,))
>         # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to ()
>         # Return value is (), which has type tuple[()]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to ()
        # Return value is (), which has type tuple[()]
        remove_first_element(xs=(1,))
```

>         remove_first_element(xs=(1, 'spam'))
>         # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to (str,)
>         # Return value is ('foo',), which has type tuple[str]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to (str,)
        # Return value is ('foo',), which has type tuple[str]
        remove_first_element(xs=(1, 'spam'))
```

>         remove_first_element(xs=(1, 'spam', 3.0))
>         # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to (str, float)
>         # Return value is ('spam', 3.0), which has type tuple[str, float]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to (str, float)
        # Return value is ('spam', 3.0), which has type tuple[str, float]
        remove_first_element(xs=(1, 'spam', 3.0))
```

    ``covariant=True`` or ``contravariant=True``.  See :pep:`484` for more
    details.  By default, type variables are invariant.

.. class:: TypeVarTuple

>     Type variable tuple. A specialised form of :class:`Type variable <TypeVar>`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Type variable tuple. A specialized form of :class:`Type variable <TypeVar>`
```
The document is mostly in American English so let's be consistent (you also have "parameterization" instead of "parameterisation" in the next line).

    that enables *variadic* generics.

    A normal type variable enables parameterization with a single type. A type
    variable tuple, in contrast, allows parameterization with an
    *arbitrary* number of types by acting like an *arbitrary* number of type
    variables wrapped in a tuple. For example::

        T = TypeVar('T')
        Ts = TypeVarTuple('Ts')

>         def remove_first_element(xs: tuple[T, *Ts]) -> tuple[*Ts]:

Reviewer: Any reason why you went for `xs` as the parameter name? Maybe `tup` or `var` would be slightly friendlier for readers? :)

(Sorry, I'm being really picky now!!)

Author: Nah, no strong reason. Changed to `tup` :)

            return xs[1:]

        # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to ()
        # Return value is (), which has type tuple[()]
        remove_first_element(xs=(1,))

        # T is bound to int, Ts is bound to (str,)

>         # Return value is ('foo',), which has type tuple[str]

Reviewer: This typo's on me, sorry 🤦‍♂️

```suggestion
        # Return value is ('spam',), which has type tuple[str]
```

Author: lol, sorry, shoulda checked more carefully

    However, note that at most one type variable tuple may appear in a single
    list of type arguments or type parameters::

        x: tuple[*Ts, *Ts]                     # Not valid
        class Array(Generic[*Shape, *Shape]):  # Not valid
            pass

    Finally, an unpacked type variable tuple can be used as the type annotation
    of ``*args``::

        def call_soon(
                callback: Callable[[*Ts], None],
                *args: *Ts
        ) -> None:
            ...
            callback(*args)

    In contrast to non-unpacked annotations of ``*args`` - e.g. ``*args: int``,
    which would specify that *all* arguments are ``int`` - ``*args: *Ts``
    enables reference to the types of the *individual* arguments in ``*args``.
    Here, this allows us to ensure the types of the ``*args`` passed
    to ``call_soon`` match the types of the (positional) arguments of
    ``callback``.

    For more details on type variable tuples, see :pep:`646`.

    .. versionadded:: 3.11

.. data:: Unpack

    A typing operator that conceptually marks an object as having been
    unpacked. For example, using the unpack operator ``*`` on a

>     :class:`type variable tuple <TypeVarTuple>` internally uses ``Unpack``

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    :class:`type variable tuple <TypeVarTuple>` is equivalent to using ``Unpack``
```
Let's not make promises about how it's implemented.

    ``covariant=True`` or ``contravariant=True``.  See :pep:`484` for more
    details.  By default, type variables are invariant.

.. class:: TypeVarTuple

    :class:`Type variable <TypeVar>` tuple.

    Usage::

        Ts = TypeVarTuple('Ts')

>         Shape = TypeVarTuple('Shape')

Reviewer 2: This example is so incomplete that by itself it's more confusing than useful. Maybe just move this into the more complete example using a class?

Author: I was copying the structure of `TypeVar`, but I'm happy to depart from precedent :)

    Vanilla type variables enable parameterization with a *fixed* number of

>     types. Type variable tuples, on the other hand, allow parameterization with

Reviewer 2: This first sentence seems to suggest to the uninitiated that a single vanilla typevar would be able to convey multiple types. Maybe instead write "A vanilla type variable enable parameterization with a single type. A type variable tuple, on the other hand, allows ..."

Author: Done.

    an *arbitrary* number of types by acting like an *arbitrary* number of type
    variables wrapped in a tuple. For example::

        class Array(Generic[*Shape]):
            pass

        from typing import NewType
        Height = NewType('Height', int)

>         Width = NewType('Width', int)

Reviewer 2: IMO the use of `NewType` is just distracting. You can just state that both `Array[int]` and `Array[int, int]` are valid, and define 1d and 2d arrays, respectively. Maybe you could add a matching definition of `__getitem__` -- would this work?
```py
def __getitem__(self, key: Shape) -> float: ...
```
(to keep it simple, hardcoding the return type).

Author: Yeah, fair. The `__getitem__` example is nice, but I'd prefer to keep it out of the very first example block, because I think the information it imparts (how to use TypeVarTuples with argument annotations; the fact that TypeVarTuples used in methods refer to the same parameters as used to instantiate the class) are not the _primary_ thing we want to impart (that `Array` can take an arbitrary number of type parameters), so I've used it in the second example block.

        1d_array: Array[Height] = Array()  # This is fine

    With one type argument, ``Array`` behaves as if ``Shape = (T,)``, where
    ``T`` is a type variable. That means ``Array`` behaves as if we'd written
    ``Generic[T]``. Note the use of the unpacking operator ``*`` to bring ``T``

>     out of the tuple and directly into the square brackets.

Reviewer 2: To me, the first two sentences ("With one ... as if we'd written `Generic[T]`.") don't put me on the right track -- there are too many "behaviors" I could imagine that aren't what you're referring to. I personally learn best from examples, so maybe you can show an example of observable behavior for 1d_array? (Note: that's not a valid identifier. :-) I guess that's where my idea of showing `__getitem__` comes in.

The last sentence is useful but maybe could be moved up so it immediately follows the example?

Author: > To me, the first two sentences ("With one ... as if we'd written Generic[T].") don't put me on the right track -- there are too many "behaviors" I could imagine that aren't what you're referring to. I personally learn best from examples, so maybe you can show an example of observable behavior for 1d_array?

Fair. I think the primary observable behaviour we want to show here is that `Array` can take an arbitrary number of type arguments, so I've consolidated the `array` instances in the very first example.

> 1d_array? Note: that's not a valid identifier. :-)

Hah, oops :) Fixed.

>     out of the tuple and directly into the square brackets.

Reviewer 5: This sentence is confusing, since `*` isn't next to `T` anywhere in the example.

Author: Good point. I've expanded this explanatory text to make this more explicit.

    ::

        2d_array: Array[Height, Width] = Array()  # This is also fine!

    With two arguments, it's as if ``Shape = (T1, T2)``, where ``T1`` and ``T2``

>     are type variables; as if ``Array`` was defined with ``Generic[T1, T2]``.

Reviewer 2: Maybe a better analogy would be with `*args` for functions? A function using `*args` can be *called* with 0, 1, 2, ... arguments. That doesn't mean it behaves as if it was *defined* with 2 arguments `x, y`.

Author: Hmm, I tried this:

```
A vanilla type variable enables parameterization with a single type. A type
variable tuple, on the other hand, allow parameterization with an
*arbitrary* number of types by acting like an *arbitrary* number of type
variables wrapped in a tuple. For example::

    Shape = TypeVarTuple('Shape')

    class Array(Generic[*Shape]): ...

    array_1d: Array[int] = Array()       # This is fine
    array_2d: Array[int, int] = Array()  # This is also fine
    array_0d: Array[()] = Array()        # Even this is fine

In the same way that a function defined with ``*args`` can be *called* with
an arbitrary number of arguments, a generic defined with a ``TypeVarTuple``
be be *parameterized* with an arbitrary number of types.
```

But in fact I think the example arrays communicate the behaviour well enough of their own; the second paragraph feels like repetition (also considering that we end up saying something very similar to the first paragraph).

>     Type variable tuples can be used any place a vanilla type variable can.

Reviewer 5: Not exactly, because I can write `def f(x: T) -> T:` but not `def f(x: *Ts) -> *Ts:`.

Author: Ah, you're right, we can't _quite_ say this. I've reworded this as "can be used in the same contexts", and added some simple variable annotation examples differentiating between `Ts`, `*Ts`, and `tuple[*Ts]`.

    However, note that they must always be used in combination with the
    unpacking operator ``*``. This helps distinguish type variable tuples from
    normal type variables::

        def returns_tuple() -> Ts:  # Not valid
          return ('spam', 42)

>         def returns_tuple() -> tuple[*Ts]:  # This is fine :)

Reviewer 5: Not a great example because the TypeVarTuple is unbound here. Maybe use `*args: *Ts` and return `args`?

Author: Hah, I always forget about this. I'd prefer not to use `*args` because we haven't introduced `*Ts` being used for `*args` yet, but I've copied one of the class-based examples from the PEP here instead.

>           return ('spam', 42)

Reviewer 2: But is it fine? Do type var tuples not have the rule (like ordinary type vars) that you need to have at least two uses? This is invalid:
```py
def f() -> T:
    return 42
```

It's also a bit jarring that the negative example uses `Ts` but the corrected example needs to conjure up `tuple` as well.

Author: Ah, you're absolutely right. I've switched to a different example of return type annotation.

    Type variable tuples can be happily combined with vanilla type variables::

        DType = TypeVar('DType')

        class Array(Generic[DType, *Shape]):  # This is fine
            pass

        1d_float_array: Array[float, Height] = Array()     # Totally fine
        2d_int_array: Array[int, Height, Width] = Array()  # Yup, fine too

    However, note that at most one type variable tuple may appear in a single
    list of type arguments or type parameters::

        class Array(Generic[*Shape, *Shape]):  # Not valid

>             pass

Reviewer 2: You are carefully not bringing up `Generic[*Shape, T]`. Is it valid?

Author: We show `Generic[DType, *Shape]` - is that not enough? Or is the point that we don't show e.g. `Generic[*Shape, DType]`? We could explicitly call it out as also valid, but I don't think the average reader would have any reason to think it wasn't possible.

Reviewer 2: It's worth calling out actually, because in a function definition `def f(*args, x)` has a different meaning than `def f(x, *args)`.

Author: Ah, good point. Done.

    Finally, an unpacked type variable tuple can be used as the type annotation
    of ``*args``::

        def args_to_tuple(*args: *Ts) -> tuple[*Ts]:
            return tuple(args)

    In contrast to non-unpacked annotations of ``*args`` - e.g. ``*args: int``,
    which would specify that *all* arguments are ``int`` - ``*args: *Ts``
    enables reference to the types of the *individual* arguments in ``*args``.
    In this case, it binds those types to ``Ts``.

>     For more details on type variable tuples, see :pep:`646`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention `Unpack[]`? People are surely going to encounter that in pre-3.11 code.

Author: Ok, I've added a quick note about it.

    :class:`Type variable <TypeVar>` tuple.

    A vanilla type variable enables parameterization with a single type. A type
    variable tuple, in contrast, allows parameterization with an
    *arbitrary* number of types by acting like an *arbitrary* number of type
    variables wrapped in a tuple. For example::

        Shape = TypeVarTuple('Shape')

        class Array(Generic[*Shape]): ...

        array_1d: Array[int] = Array()       # 1 type parameter: fine
        array_2d: Array[int, int] = Array()  # 2 type parameters: also fine
        array_0d: Array[()] = Array()        # 0 type parameters: also fine

    Note the use of the unpacking operator ``*`` in ``Generic[*Shape]``.
    Conceptually, you can think of ``Shape`` as a tuple of type variables
    ``(T1, T2, ...)``. ``Generic[*Shape]`` would then become

>     ``Generic[*(T1, T2, ...)]``. The ``*`` brings the type variables out of the

Reviewer 2: Maybe add "which is equivalent to `Generic[T1, T2, ...]`". Because that's what we're really after.

Author: I was a bit worried that `Generic[T1, T2, ...]` might make some users think that this was valid syntax itself - and I didn't want to break the flow of reading by adding a parenthetical that it's not. But if you think it's fine, I'm happy to go for it.
